because you see their relationship with
food
is not about the present moment it's not
about the breakfast it's not about the
lunch or the dinner it's about
their
years of
baggage that they've brought into where
they're at so you have to start to
unpeel that and that takes months can
take long years to really work with
somebody to overcome that disordered
eating and i don't mean that just an
eating disorder i think there's a eating
disorder spectrum i think that there's a
lot of people that really have
disordered relationships with food and
body shame so that if i had to punch
anybody patient-wise
if it got them to change it would hurt a
little bit but if it made them change i
would do it um
because it's
literally killing them
hey everyone welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr will cole he was
named one of the top 50 functional
medicine practitioners in the u.s and
he's written the book quite literally on
how to do a keto diet with primarily
plant-based nutrition it's called
ketotarian he also founded the cole
natural health centers and is the host
of not one but two health and wellness
podcasts goop fellas and keto talks but
even with two podcasts i'm not sure you
could do more than simply scratch the
surface of the number of topics that
this man can go deep on including what i
want to start with today which is the
terrifyingly complex
diseases of modernity to put a nice
fancy word to it i love it
so define that for us like what are the
things that are ailing us you talked
about in the book that there's a storm
coming what is that storm yeah so
this
commonality between just about every
health problem we face as a world it has
one thing in common
and it's inflammation it's chronic
insidious
inflammation and inflammation is a good
thing right it's part of our immune
system it fights viruses and bacteria
it's like really good to have healthy
balance inflammation levels the problem
is so many people that we love and so
people that we know
they're going through chronic
inflammatory issues so anything from
diabetes to heart disease to autoimmune
conditions to things that don't even
seem inflammatory like anxiety and
depression and fatigue like people don't
think of mental health issues as having
inflammatory components but that's what
the literature suggests yeah that that
was super interesting talk about that so
mental health which for sure before i
started researching about health i never
in a million years would have thought
that it was anything other than sort of
a
uh mental as removed from the body
problem or even a brain wiring problem i
wouldn't have thought that like you said
the best medicine is on the end of our
fork for something that has to do with
the mind so how is
the inflammation triggered underlying
all of this and then how does it work
its way up to being a mental disorder so
the things that we do in life these
epigenetic modulators the foods we're
eating or the foods we're not eating our
stress
our exposure to toxins all of these
things in life are constantly and
dynamically instructing our biochemistry
influencing our immune system and
bringing up inflammation or bringing
down and modulating it in some ways fast
let's let's dive into that so long time
listeners are listeners of the show will
understand the difference between
genetics and epigenetics but
are you saying that lifestyle food etc
are essentially signaling molecules that
tell what genes to turn on and off what
amount to turn on exactly they're they
are instructing gene expression and
they're up regulating pathways in our
body of our immune system so
all of these things that we do in our
life and when you look at the statistics
of these diseases that i mentioned these
are largely overcomeable healable things
at least supportable things with easy
lifestyle change
it's not easy but it's needed human
nature is to do this same thing and
expect a different result human nature
is
to want a quick fix
you know every meal
is another opportunity
to feed health or feed health problems
there's no like benign food
there's no benign
activity and that's actually why
i talk about this concept of the
inflammation spectrum in ketotarian
we are all somewhere on this
inflammation spectrum from one end it's
mild fatigue and brain fog and low-grade
anxiety which are ubiquitous and then
the other end of that spectrum is
full-blown icd-10 like diagnosis codes
you know autoimmune conditions or
diabetes god forbid or any one of these
problems and then everything in between
on that continuum so my job
is as a functional medicine practitioner
is to like find out where what what's
driving that inflammation and then start
moving their health in a positive
direction all right what are some super
common
inflammation causes that you see day in
and day out with your patients the foods
we eat is instructing our biochemistry
it's influencing the gut microbiome
which is 75 of the immune system and
that's up regulating
the immune system in that way a lot of
gut-centric inflammation has to do with
food but it's not just food so you have
to look at toxins i see that quite a bit
and that's a broad umbrella but products
that people are using um environmental
toxins get real [__] specific so i'm
gonna if you had to put an apex predator
of toxins are we talking glyphosate
yeah it's our food supply it's it's
things that our food the way our food is
grown the way that it's grown the way
the things that are sprayed on the food
but it's also
not just
the food itself but it's it's how people
are cooking they're cooking it in a
wrong way they're frying it and they're
kind of turning good fats into bad fats
by smoking it uh cooking it beyond the
smoking point which is different for
different oils yes so give me give me a
short list of like the real bad things
to avoid so
um
to avoid glyphosate should i be going to
locals farmer markets or like
how do we avoid that one
what fats should we be cooking with how
do we know the smoke point how do we
make sure that we're in safe ranges yeah
i would say for most people and this is
the double-edged sword of information
right we sometimes people can get this
paralysis of analysis they feel like i'm
screwed
like what
i'm i have to live in a bubble and like
eat air and ice cubes and like to do
nothing so i want to be very like
stressing about food is not good for a
health either i think people
need to find out where they're at on
this inflammation spectrum and
the way that i
explain it in the book the inflammation
spectrum is there's seven sections on
this spectrum
there's brain there's hormones there's
blood sugar there's detox it's
musculoskeletal
the seven and then there's connections
of the seven or poly inflammation
so we go
and ask questions about each section so
for example like the outer third of your
eyebrows are thinning it may seem random
to the lay person
but that's a sign that the thyroid may
be not working well
so someone may think what the heck why
is he asking me about the outer third of
my eyebrows these are clues like check
engine lights people need to start
taking inventory of this stuff because
it's the mundane
that people just think it's normal
but these things are not normal like
having low grade anxiety isn't normal
like not for having this fatigue and
brain fog just like getting through the
day with tons of coffee and sugar
is so ubiquitous but it's not normal
but people think it's normal because
that's their life
so through asking the questions in the
information spectrum book people can
start being conscious of the fact that
this isn't normal whoa i thought it was
chronic disease is ubiquitous but not
normal right
uh
i do suffer from low grade anxiety it
used to be bordering on paralyzing and i
had to work my way out of that now what
complicates things for me is that
working my way out of that
was
massively about getting my mind in a
different place and when i when i first
started having to unwind it i had no
sense that this was diet related so i
went from almost paralyzed to
still sort of a background issue but
very manageable all mentally but now i'm
in the zone where i feel like this
probably is
something that's happening at a gut
level like a literal gut level if i had
to guess
so
i come to you as a patient i can
articulate that what what do i begin to
do what am i am i doing an elimination
diet am i going cutitarian to me i
would go deep on a health history let's
do it okay fire away uh
do you have a family history of
autoimmune problems yes
okay
and that's that continuum i mean just
because you have a family history of
something doesn't mean you're going to
get it but i find that a lot of people
with this
low grade anxiety or anxiety and panic
attacks
often times not every time you'll find
this autoimmune component in the family
and there's a whole field of research
called the cytokine model of cognitive
function is basically how inflammation
impacts our brain so that's anxiety
depression brain fog adhd autism
and the like
so
i would want to look at the second brain
at your gut and kind of look at the
complexities of the gastrointestinal
system and the microbiome which is the
trillions of bacteria in our gut okay
which will influence our our brains send
off a test yeah and you're looking for
diversity we're looking for diversity
we're looking for bacterial imbalances
or dysbiosis or bacterial overgrowths
we're looking for any yeast and fungal
overgrowths we're looking for digestion
and absorption
we're looking at intestinal permeability
or what they call leaky gut syndrome
we're looking at inflammation like
markers like calprotectin these are
immune inflammatory markers in the gut
so we look at that to kind of get a
benchmark of the what's going on in the
second brain your gut and brain are
formed from the same fetal tissue all
right so let's say what we get back is
ah there are signs of gut permeability
because i
this is about maybe a year ago
i all of a sudden i had a rash and i was
like the [__] is going on
it was so abrupt and so out of nowhere
and i had not changed my diet so i was
like
is it possible that like we changed
detergents or something and so we were
like going through some of those things
is this a topical reaction and then i
was just like no i know better than this
like the skin is for sure a
representation of something that's going
on inside
so
i started researching um histamine foods
that were high in histamine and then i
also i ate a lot of olives and i read
that that was high in histamine and so i
removed that i was eating a lot of cured
meat a lot of cured meat yeah so i cut
that out
and then once i started doing that poof
it went away
and i was like well that's weird so i
feel like even now i'm i'm at this where
if i eat things that are high in
histamine i'm gonna have a problem where
i'll either break out or i'll start
getting itchy or if i eat too many um
highly processed foods that'll also and
i don't know what ingredient it is in
there or what
but if i stray too much from
just whole food
that and specifically avoid even some
whole foods like olives that are high in
histamine
yeah so i would say
knowing what i know
at this
and i talk about histamine intolerance
at length in the inflammation spectrum
because of this sort of gut centric
inflammatory response and i see
histamine intolerance a lot so it's
typically caused or at least in part
driven by something called small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth or sebum
oh i know it well so it can basically
it's bacteria living where it shouldn't
live in the small intestines and you
know this i'm sure but there's
this connection between the gut and the
skin it's called in functional medicine
we refer to it as the gut skin axis it's
not just functional medicine if you look
at pubmed you'll see that connection as
well um but it's the
the idea that what goes on in the
gastrointestinal system is influencing
the skin it's out it's the check engine
light again of what's going on in the
gut so i would look at these gene snips
these single nucleotide gene variants
that we get a copy from our mom a copy
from her dad so with this autoimmune
inflammation spectrum component
potentially with your case i would want
to look at these snips but it's
important to know these snips have been
around for 10 000 years our genes have
remained largely unchanged so yes genes
are a component to that but so much of
that is epigenetics so research
estimates that two-thirds of that
autoimmune inflammation puzzle is
epigenetics the lifestyle stuff that we
do but genes are a part of that so if
you have a slow gene
a sluggish gene variant that's gonna
that's gonna slow down your body's
breakdown of these histamines if that's
the issue it seems like if you're
avoiding these high histamine foods but
we can kind of know
as you know definitively as we can know
from a lab standpoint if that's an issue
or not i love it yeah so you call it a
storm the storm of inflammation is
coming and when i look at the world it
i'm actually scared so you talk about
seeing people that have kids that are
like two years old that have autoimmune
conditions and i'm like what the [__]
like when you think about okay sure if
i've
punished myself for decades and decades
and decades with a stupid lifestyle i
get why i end up with an autoimmune
disease when you're two it's like that
pretty clearly says to me something
happened to your parents something
happened to your grandparents your
great-grandparents and that this has
been like this um
ever-escalating problem from generation
to generation passed down either through
the microbiome it's not changes in dna
at least i don't think so when i think
about epigenetic changes that can be
handed down
that gets maybe a little more
controversial but the microbiome i would
say is pretty incontrovertible which is
you're going to pick up what your
parents had so it's they're they're do
you agree that there's something
happening
generationally yeah there's no way
around it you can look at the statistics
of what kids are up against again it's a
confluence of a lot of different factors
but it's largely the world we're living
in and we are just
you got to define that for me what do
you mean so i'm eating glyphosate
problem number one
i'm
eating
vegetable oils that was stupid what else
is stacking on us well if you want to
get very specific here i think sugar is
a major driver of inflammation and it's
so
it's everywhere it's in so many things
with various
chop nice sounding names euphemisms
sugar people are sucked in by uh
evaporated cane juice
uh even like coconut sugar
you know it sounds more
like
natural right
but it's still sugar it may be a better
but better doesn't mean optimal right so
i
look at the grams of carbohydrates look
at the grams of sugar i think that
that's a very easy thing for people to
start being mindful of
but then look we have these some people
are more insulin resistant than other
people they're going to probably have a
lower tolerance for carbs than the next
person that doesn't have those gene
variants they're insulin sensitive so
yeah some people have
like i like to use that cup analogy some
people have big cups some people have
small cups meaning get away with a lot
of quote unquote abuse before you see a
problem right the genetic tolerance to
stressors we can't change our cup size
we're born with that but we can change
to a large degree what we put it in our
cups so if people have small cups
they're going to have to do more they're
just going to have to and it's not fair
but that it's reality and they're going
to have to lean into emptying that cup
people with large cups they can start
off simple and lean into it
all right let's talk to the small cup
people so
we're cutting out sugar
we are are we going ketotarian like is
that going to be a key part of this it
depends on what their personal
preference is ketotarian is the way that
i eat it's a very effective way for
brain function it's a very effective way
of lowering inflammation
it's the a clean way to do the ketogenic
diet and i do a cyclical ketotarian
approach where i i'll be in ketosis and
then i moderate my carbs when i want to
and you fluctuate your carbs more than
your protein
you'll have to adjust your protein and
fat when you bring your carbs up but
you find a rhythm
and a grace that works for your body so
people have to do some experimenting so
maybe it is ketotarian or maybe they can
just lean into like you said an
elimination diet that's how what i
actually advocate for in the
inflammation spectrum now do you think
that ketotarian works because people are
eliminating a lot of the sugar and other
garbage that's part of it yeah so what
is it about a ketogenic diet that makes
it so anti-inflammatory well let's start
with the basics because i i agree with
you you're going off of sugar you're
going off of inflammatory fats like
canola oil and soybean where you should
be but most people in keto space are
they're going off of grains they're
going off of all these sort of
inflammatory foods so that's of course
foundational to its benefits but
we can go an extra level here and kind
of tap into our body's
metabolic state known as ketosis so your
body we all we all have this capability
but beta hydroxybutyrate
is a ketone that our body produces and
yeah it's a way to burn fat and that's
what people are excited about the
ketogenic diet but i what excites me
even more than the fat burning and
becoming a fat burner is its
anti-inflammatory benefits in the body
that excites me as a functional medicine
practitioner way more that you can lower
like things like nf kappa b and cox cox2
and then these inflammasomes that are
high in the people we love and maybe in
ourselves
so let's tap into our body's own innate
way to modulate inflammation levels and
balance inflammation levels
okay so to do that yeah i'm going to
walk through some of the things that i
think you would recommend
so we're going to have to experiment for
sure and you're very clear that one size
definitely does not fit all and i think
that's absolutely correct when it comes
to nutrition whether it's just the
epigenetic state that you're in or the
genetic state or the combination of the
two which of course is the reality but
you're probably going to want to
eliminate sugar
you're going to want to eliminate bad
fats which you've already listed some of
those you're going to want to stop
damaging your fats meaning cooking them
past the
the
smoke point you're going to want to
avoid environmental toxins let's list a
few you're going to want to stop eating
things that have glyphosate which is
going to be really hard but you're going
to try to eliminate that aka roundup
you're going to eat whole food whenever
humanly possible
your
your recommendation certainly in
ketotarian is to be largely plant-based
you're very even-handed about
the use of certain animal proteins
in moderation i don't remember you
actually using that word but like that
is certainly the gist of the book
and then the part that i'm just looking
at the way that you live you live
outside the city you specifically
wanted to get away
um all those things how's that plan yeah
all those things are super important but
it's not just about food and i think you
brought up a good point so food has to
be like a major component of this you
can't
you have to start there
and i think healthy fats are one way
because if you're eliminating carbs and
sugar you have to fill it with something
else avocados avocado oil
nuts and seeds i recommend soaking them
to break down the phytic acid and the
lectins make them more digestible
um
coconut
and
dimension olives and olive oil and
wild caught fish
fresh seafood things like that so that
would be the healthy fats and some
protein in there
what is something that makes you want to
punch your patients in the face
like do they ignore advice a lot are
there just common mistakes that people
just keep making because they're
addicted to sugar or
anything like that and i know you would
punch them with love that goes without
question
but is there any like frustration
element to dealing with that because in
my own life there are people that i love
desperately
that suffer
needlessly in my opinion because there
are things that they can't give up or
give up or whatever if i had to love
punch a patient
if that was a thing
i would say it's the self-sabotage it's
it's the people that
you know
the other side is so near like if they
could completely improve their wellness
in a powerful way
but they have baggage and trauma that's
sabotaging them in the present moment
that's [__] interesting what do you
mean
how's how is baggage and trauma
sabotaging them because you see their
relationship with food
is not about the present moment it's not
about the breakfast it's not about the
lunch or the dinner it's about
their
years of
baggage that they've brought into where
they're at so you have to start to
unpeel that and that takes months can
take years to really work with somebody
to overcome that disordered
eating and i don't mean that just an
eating disorder i think there's a eating
disorder spectrum i think that there's a
lot of people that
really have disordered relationships
with food and body shame so that if i
had to punch anybody patient-wise
if it got them to change it would hurt a
little bit but if it made them change i
would do it um because
it's
literally killing them
it's and they you see them doing well
and then they go off and they binge
again and they are just they feel like a
failure and their guilt and shame around
it that takes time to start to unwind
that
whenever i heard somebody ask you like
and of course i'm sort of ruining it for
myself because i'm going to ask you at
the end but
uh
like what's one thing that you would
have people do you always say you can't
heal a body that you hate
i think that's super interesting that
you get involved in like the mental
aspect of the game
how do you do that like as a clinician
how do you
help with that
it's such a central part to my job like
the science is important we run the labs
you look at the data we look at the
objective baseline and that's without a
doubt
paramount to
my work as a functional medicine
practitioner but
there are stuff that you can't measure
on a lab that influences the lab
you cannot spend
your whole day
like talking to people that are going
through real stuff for the past 11 years
at this point and not see this human
component this
emotional mental spiritual component to
their relationship with food and their
physiology at large
we find ourselves and by we i mean
myself and my team find ourselves as
almost food therapist in many ways
as being in the space of wellness is you
have to get this
this right this the spiritual block
right
then when you get that right
all of the food and the macros and the
micros and all the
nutrition stuff tends to fall into place
a lot more easily
it's an outward expression of their
realization of who they are
and then some people
have to deal with just the logistical
nutritional stuff i'm not saying that
there sometimes is just a food change
and they're fine but if i had to say one
thing that's plaguing our
culture as a whole in addition to the
food stuff
it's people's
disordered relationship with themselves
so
how do you
insert yourself in that do are there
questions that you ask is it just case
by case and you pick up on something
that somebody says like how do you help
them begin to heal that
yeah we just ask a lot of questions to
get to the to the root cause but
it's this
it's the dichotomy of functional
medicine it's the science and then the
art and the art side of it is feeling
the energy
most of my patients are online but i
still feel that pause or that way that
they word things and you get to know
somebody and i'm a fairly empathic
person and you just get that rhythm of
where they're at and what they need and
the way that you even should be speaking
to them because not everybody like you
have to kind of
sometimes lean people in gently for them
to receive it at all because sometimes
if you go with good intentions and say
this is all the stuff you need to be
doing
they will throw their hands up and walk
the other way because it's just too much
too soon so you have to find the rhythm
of what what's their love language where
are they at
and then what's the lab what do the lab
say so what are some of the patterns of
dysfunction like what do you see people
really struggle with that's super common
well i think in this
wellness space
i think that various forms of orthorexia
are a problem meaning they get so
paranoid about their diet that that
becomes its own fixation yeah and a lot
of times it's borne out of real health
issues because we have this epidemic of
inflammation
of autoimmune conditions they are having
reactions to the like healthiest food
under the sun they're like having
histamine reactions from them it's like
if i can't eat vegetables and olives
like what the heck am i supposed to do
and again it's stress and shame and
anxiety around about food
healthy food and healthy eating i think
that's a problem and then i think that
because people are stressed and they're
not sleeping well people are stress
eating i think that's those are the two
things that i see the most
that's super interesting one of the
things that i found fascinating about
your own story is that you start as uh
were you full vegan or were you just
vegetarian i was a vegan for 10 years
okay so
you migrate away from that why did you
migrate away from that
so i think
there's a good way to do an optimal way
to go to the vegan diet and there's many
vegan keto options in ketotarian so if
people are for religious reasons or
ethical reasons or personal preference
reasons
i wanted to teach them to go entirely
plant-based in a way that i believe is
sustainable not only for the environment
but for
their physiology
their environment their bodily
environment so
we all have different gene snips i have
a double gene snip
of the mthfr gene which is the gene that
makes the enzyme that converts folic
acid into folate
which we need is a methyl donor it
basically does a lot of cool things for
our body it's a carbon hydrogen group
that
brings down inflammation it helps our
hormones working well our brain working
well it builds proteins in our bodies my
body does that pretty dang slowly like
up to 70 percent slower and
folate
uh especially in abundant amounts and
b12 aren't as high in in b vitamins
when you're doing entirely plant-based
so i
adjusted my diet where i'm still
predominantly plant-based
but i'm bringing things like egg yolks
into the vegetarian land
and then the wild caught fish and as far
as the pescetarian section of my diet
to provide my body more ample
bio-available sources of these nutrients
and omega fats are another one of them
not just the b vitamins but the
conversion
is lousy in my body of these like flax
seeds and chia seeds my body doesn't
convert them to sort of the long chain
omegas as well as somebody else so we
have to find out what works for a body
then there's some people that do great
with vegan diets i mean you know rich
role right i mean the guy does amazing
on this diet and his wife julie they do
fine
but
i talk to patients for a living and i
most of my patients are very well read
they've done all their research
they're eating cleaner than most
americans they're eating vegan diets
they're eating vegetarian diets they're
doing all these things but their health
is struggling how can we optimize it
without abandoning the foundation of
maybe their ethics or principles right
so one thing in the book that you cover
is what oftentimes vegetarians and
vegans do wrong what is that where do
they
what whole is in their diet that you
help fix
i think a lot of them
overdue on the carbs you know they're
carbitarians by definition and
when you look at the vegan diet
vegetarian diet it doesn't by it default
meaning it's a healthy diet it just
means you're avoiding animal foods so
you have to have it properly formed you
have to really lean into it it's so easy
because it's convenient to get all these
convenient vegetarian foods just like
any other way of eating so you want to
make sure you're again focusing on whole
foods real foods look at your macros
just get a snapshot of where you're at
from a macronutrient which is proteins
fats and carbs some people have a taller
they can handle more carbs some people
can't
like i have many patients that if they
ate what rich role ate their blood sugar
would be through the roof
but some people can do it
so we have to find your what works for
your body and what doesn't
so there they could that doesn't mean
that they shouldn't be plant-based maybe
they just need to shift what plant-based
foods are focusing on that's all
so
the carnivore diet is something that i'm
super interested in so my wife has
struggled very profoundly with
microbiome issues
and
she's made tremendous progress she's
been dealing with it now for four years
but she's made tremendous progress and
she's gotten to the point where
the things that she eats she can
maintain equilibrium but she isn't
like
progressing as much as i she's sort of
hit steady state but she's not making
progress in my estimation um
and so one thing that if the hypothesis
about lectins is accurate and that you
have plants that have these toxins in
them you eat the toxins they break the
epithelial lining of the gut and now you
have
your autoimmune response
if that is accurate then potentially for
her if she was a good carnivore and ate
nose to tail and you know got the whole
mix of everything and isn't just eating
hamburgers or steaks
i'd be very curious to see if that
worked for her or not um i'd be curious
to get your take on the carnivore diet
yeah so
you think as the author of ketotarian i
wouldn't advocate for the carnivore diet
it's i do use a carnivore diet in my for
my patients that need it it's an
ultimate elimination approach you're
taking out a lot of variables
and these people with really
dysfunctional guts and gastrointestinal
lining and microbiome and this
inflammatory cascades going on sometimes
you need that
intervention to lower inflammation for a
short period of time or for
a period of time it could be months
if you're going and going to do the
carnivore diet you're going to want to
make it make sure it's nutrient dense
you're going to want to make sure you're
going for more of the organ meats from a
nutrient density standpoint like you
pointed out and i have people be fish
centric as well it's not just about the
organ meat so i want people to getting
making sure they're getting their
healthy omegas from
the fish and grass-fed beef house has
omegas as well but the problem with this
is that
they it's not sustainable for most
people long term and we're going off of
dairy too and many times we're going off
of egg whites
for a while too because
the albumin can be a problem for some
people with autoimmunity the egg white
some people have dairy sensitivities as
well so it's pretty tight that's why for
most people it's not going to be a
long-term thing so we do it for a period
of time we do some broths and soups and
stews and things like that
sort of a gaps approach i don't know if
you're familiar with gaps
it stands for gut and physiology
syndrome or gut in psychology depending
on what you're using it for but it's the
gut brain access the gut physiology axis
so
the premise is lots of bone broth soups
and stews so we use that with sort of
these nutrient dense organ meats for a
time and then we lean in why soups and
stews bone broth i get yeah i don't
understand soups and stews it's soft and
cooked meat because even the meat can be
hard to digest for these people many of
them have hypochlorhydria decreased
hydrochloric acid they're not breaking
down meats even wow they have really
messed up guts so we have to help with
their digestion at the beginning really
to even break down meats but then you
start with you lean into pureed
vegetables after that and you know uh
soft cooked vegetables low fodmap
vegetables which are the fermentable
sugars that people with these dysbioses
can have a problem too how the hell if i
went
carnivore for a year
how the hell would i still have bacteria
like a sibo problem so for fermentation
being the thing that i'm thinking of
would that bacteria not die off well
there's certain bacteria
and yeast that feed on other things too
they can feed on proteins they can feed
on ketones
so then you're going to have to bring in
some typically herbal antimicrobials to
help with that oh god this stuff gets so
complicated it is complicated my whole
day job is like looking all the
variables and trying to make this as
digestible no pun intended but as
practical as as possible
yeah man god going through this with my
wife it really it is it has opened my
eyes to trying things that i never in a
million years would have thought would
work the laundry list of crazy things
that she has tried from like hold a vial
of this stuff and i'll know if you're
allergic to it and it's like yeah try it
all like do everything you can grip
strength based on what she's holding i
mean stuff that i'm like is not possible
yeah but
she's
it's almost like
the crazier stuff we finally have given
ourselves over to and just like i hate
the word surrendered more than you can
imagine but at some point like we have
just literally just surrendered to
the potential like
that anything might work
tried in a very systematic titrated way
like we're not just throwing things to
the wind but it's like
trying things
anything just to see like if something
works and it's it's really been
interesting to see things that i never
thought would work start to slide into
place which is actually one of the
things that makes me consider carnivore
never would have considered it before
yeah but let's talk uh carnivore versus
vegetables so i maybe i like vegetables
a lot but i tend to like the ones that
are really um
carby
sweet potatoes are so delicious i would
give virtually everything to eat them
all day um
but
i
even though i like vegetables partly out
of laziness because i don't want to cook
them
i am almost not entirely because i'll
throw in rice every now and then um but
i'm
carnivore
like that what is it
what
nutrients do you fear i will miss
if i were to eat organ meat and all that
but not
have vegetables i think if you are
eating organ meat
uh and doing it well with a variety of
nutrient-dense meats i don't think you'd
be meeting eat missing many nutrients
other than
fiber
which
is
a major way that we help with gut
diversity
a robust variety of plant foods is
associated with a healthier microbiome
longer term and we have longer term
studies with these we don't have longer
term studies with the carnivore diet i
would assume that if someone's doing it
properly there they probably at a period
of time would be
would seem more good than bad because
they're removing a lot of foods and then
it's going to be a net positive for them
if they're doing a properly formed
carnivore diet right but
is that going to be sustainable long
term for them
most people are going to want more
variety than that no i get that
so
i do uh intermittent fasting every day i
do i try to keep my average pretty damn
close to 20 hours a day
what are what's your take on
intermittent fasting fasting in general
useful not useful
i i love it i i advocate it in both of
my books i but you have to find what
works for your body because i feel like
sometimes people
i see this a lot they go too aggressive
with time-restricted feeding or
intermittent fasting and then they
what's too aggressive well it's for
their body so let's just say
they want to try
like the omad like the one meal a day 22
to two you are
getting your calories in in a two hour
to one hour window so 22 to 2 or 23 to 1
fasting to eating window
you have to make sure you're getting
enough calories in that time that's a
big meal yeah so i've been experimenting
with it you've tried omad oh yeah and i
like it and i've just been doing this
i knew about the research i've written
about it before but i didn't do it for
myself until recently um
saying because i want to live forever
okay is this going to help in that
endeavor i mean with
these longer periods of fasting you in
theory are up regulating these autophagy
pathways okay cellular recycling
gobbling a good sales goal where do you
think that kicks in 16 hour 18 hour 20
hours well i think depends on how
much inflammation is going on in the
person it depends on how insulin will
determine when autophagy kicks in yeah
because if the body you see people that
are resistant and look we can't gauge i
have no practical clinical way for me to
gauge autophagy
i wish i did but when a lab comes out i
will be running it but when you look at
people's biomarkers and the things we
can gauge you look at their blood sugar
you look at their insulin levels look at
their inflammation levels some people
can't get into this in ketosis very
easily they have to kind of
get these things in check and that takes
time right and then you could measure
your glucose you can measure your
insulin you can measure your ketones if
you wanted to have you ever worn a
continuous glucose i haven't it's
[__] interesting dude you have to do
it i need i know i need to i have
patience on it but i was gonna say like
that's a must
that it's it is if your diet is clean
it's a little bit
gimmicky maybe the wrong word but you
just get to see like oh wow like i ate
an impossible burger i thought i'm
really gonna like go ham on this whole
plant protein thing or plant-based diet
thing let me see how i do as i
upregulate
admittedly it was at a restaurant so
maybe they put so much panache in it
that it you know is what made it
ridiculous but dude i reacted like i ate
ice cream it spiked my glucose to like
170. which for me is crazy town yeah i
mean you could just see on the cause
it's you know my continuous monitor is
pretty flat
this massive peak it was crazy that is
crazy crazy all right
where can people find you where can they
find your
two amazing books the inflammation book
is out the inflammation spectrum comes
out october 15th okay so it's on
pre-order now depending on when people
listen to this but
uh yeah it comes out uh october 15th and
ketotarian's out now but everything's at
drwillcole.com
that's awesome yeah
i'm gonna take away from you the answer
of uh love thyself and love thy body and
get rid of the shame around food which
is absolutely critical but if people
were going to make one change that would
have the biggest positive impact on
their health what change would you have
to make
cut sugar out or lower it it's i heard
it once that it's like a recreational
drug you should not
not use it very often
but and
supplement that with healthy fats
so avocados avocado oil olives olive oil
grass-fed beef wild caught fish i think
that those
taking the place of sugar is would be
one thing would change the human race in
a positive way i would agree with that
awesome well thank you so much for
coming out man that was amazing
appreciate it guys i think he has a lot
of very even-handed advice across the
spectrum talks a lot about having to do
the testing yourself but walks you
through exactly how to do that i think
you will really enjoy digging into his
books his videos everything it is all
absolutely fantastic i can't recommend
it enough if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential